Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. in the last few
videos in this series on mathematics foundations
we've been looking at Euclid's elements the most
important mathematics book of all time despite is
serious importance as a model for mathematics
research and exposition and as an instructive
manual for students Euclid does have some flaws
some of them we've pointed out already the main
difficulty throughout is that the definitions
are weak we don't really know what we are talking
about when we study Euclid this is a very serious
difficulty and it's one that has to be surmounted
however there are other difficulties too as began
to be appreciated in the 19th century Euclid
makes many assumptions which aren't officially
built into his postulates for example he makes
assumptions about the intersections of things he
assumes that two lines cross like this actually
meet at point O that's physically very intuitively
reasonable it's not actually a consequence of
his postulates and definitions here's another
example when he constructs a perpendicular to a
line through a point he first uses his compass
to get these two points and then he draws two
circles and when those two circles intersect we
get a lie however the problem is again that these
two circles that we've drawn how do we know that
those two circles actually intersect Euclid just
assumes it other assumptions are related
to congruence Euclid uses proper motions
or things like translations rotations implicitly
throughout his work this is the way he describes
equality between geometrical objects but he
never says very clearly what he means by such
a transformation and what kind of transformations
were actually considering another difficulty has
to do with continuity and assumptions about the
nature of the real line some of these issues are
more subtle and we're going to talk about them
later when we talk about the continuum he also
has assumptions about between us that although
he never says so it's important in some of his
arguments that we know whether a point like
this B is between a and C or not in between a
and C we've also seen that the later books on
solid geometry and three-dimensional geometry
are weaker they don't really hang together quite
as solidly as the first four or five books but I
think we need to return to the critical issue
of definitions in mathematics is crucial that
we know exactly what we are talking about and
Euclid's elements just does not make the grade
when it comes to saying precisely what it is
he's talking about unfortunately he has been
a role model in that regard for many people who
write geometry books it's become accepted that
when it comes to geometry we don't really have
to say what it is that we're talking about this
is a very unfortunate situation and one that we
need to seriously correct and they're going to
correct it but first let's have a look at some
developments that resulted from these logical
flaws around the beginning of the 20th century
the difficulties of Euclid could no longer be
avoided Virgen Russell wrote an important essay
called the teaching of Euclid where he laid out
very clearly some of the logical difficulties
that people had been ignoring David Hilbert who
was one of the most prominent mathematicians
of the time certainly realized the importance
of not only acknowledging Euclid's difficulties
but also overcoming them he wrote a book called
foundations of geometry which was very influential
with mathematicians but completely ignored by math
educators in it he proposed a new framework
for geometry unfortunately his new framework
was much more complicated than Euclid's because
he decided to pursue a path called now formalism
where one does not actually bother defining the
main terms so nature but in a point what is a lie
what is congruence what is between us these are
all undefined notions for Hilbert he just makes
clear what he wants to do with those notions in
other words the rules and the relations that those
notions have to satisfy with regard to each other
so in some sense mathematics in this framework
becomes a game with symbols which don't have
any meaning but with prescribed rules by which
we can operate for high school teachers it was
completely impossible but nevertheless Hilbert's
attempt was a valiant one and one that caused a
lot of subsequent mathematicians to have serious
reservations about the possibilities of setting
up geometry correctly if David Hilbert could not
come up with a good system for our foundations of
geology then most mathematicians felt that it was
impossible this was just in the too hard basket
as a result of directions of geometry both in
research and in teaching dramatically changed in
the 20th century abstraction flourished theories
became more and more complicated while the
foundations of the subject languished at the
level of teaching there was a steady decline of
geometry in schools throughout the century the
amount of geometry that was taught lessened and
lessened to the extent that now in places like New
South Wales high school students almost learn no
geometry this is a dreadful state of affairs what
do we need we need to overcome the difficulties
we need to step up to the plate and set up proper
foundations for a geometry it turns out that this
is not in the too hard basket at all in fact it's
possible to do it in both a simple and elegant
way that everybody can understand what we need
is a new and proper foundation for geometry and
we're going to give that we need to revitalize
geometrical intuition rigor and practice in
schools and we need to convince people that
geometry really is a dynamic subject that connects
with so many aspects of real life with graphics
computer design surveying engineering astronomy
many other subjects so our next task is to show
how we begin laying out foundations for a geometry
in a good elementary and basic way we're going to
start just with the framework for arithmetic
that we've already developed in the arithmetic
part of this foundation series so please have a
look at that series again if you need reminding
and next time we're going to start laying out
foundations of geometry in a correct and good
way I hope you're going to join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger, thanks for listening.